Yale Wins the Yale-Harvard Regatta

NEW LONDON, CT – As Amtrak's Acela train roared overhead, Yale jumped off the line to a quick two-seat lead over Harvard. The national champion Yale Heavyweight Crew put an exclamation point on a perfect season by beating its archrival today in the oldest intercollegiate athletic competition. The Bulldogs, who never trailed in the nation's longest race, a 4-miler on the Thames River, beat Harvard by three boat lengths to capture the Yale-Harvard Regatta.

The 1V, 2V, and combo boat all triumphed over Harvard. The 3V fell short by about a boat length to the Crimson.

As is tradition, the weekend begins with the combination race the evening prior to the 1V, 2V, and 3V races. This is the competition between the 4V boats. For the first time in 14 years, Yale won the combo race meaning the rock would remain painted blue for today's racing.

Katherine Hofmann '20, who coxed the combo boat to victory, said that she was excited to "give the 1V, 2V, and 3V a blue rock to row by during their races against Harvard."

Today's racing began at 4:45 PM with the 3V event. In what was a valiant effort, the Elis finished a length down behind Harvard after two competitive miles.

Spirits remained high in anticipation for the 2V event, a race Yale won by a boat length open over Harvard. Shortly after the flag dropped, Yale walked out to a few seats lead over the Crimson and never looked back. Yale rowed comfortably out in front with strong, long, and efficient strokes that are characteristic of the Yale Crew program.

Finally, as the sun set over the Thames, the back to back national champs were locked into the stake boats and ready to race. Yale had a quick start and continued to dominate the race for the next four miles. Rowing two to three beats under Harvard, Yale pushed out and retuned home with yet another Harvard shirt to boast.

Captain Paul Jacquot '18, said "We have one of the better programs in the nation and it's going to stay like that. It wasn't that way when we got here, but it's what we were striving to do. I consider this mission accomplished. Let's hope the guys can keep it going."

Sholto Carnegie '18, who stroked the varsity crew, remarked "I'm so fortunate to be part of this program, it's the best thing that's ever happened to me. Whenever you line up against [Harvard], it's one stroke after the other, laying your absolute heart into it."

Spectators who made their way out to Gales Ferry today were rewarded with clear skies and relatively calm conditions. Yale Alumni, family and friends sitting above the boathouse viewed the racing via livestream before welcoming the oarsmen back to the Ferry following their race.

Much of the teams success can be attributed to Yale's Craig W. Johnson '68 Head Coach, Stephen Gladstone. After today's racing, Gladstone said, "It's a strong crew, they have really good leverage and they kept moving down the course… long and steady. This was mandatory, beating Harvard… Yale guys have to beat Harvard. It would be a bitter way to end the season if we didn't do that."

PHOTO GALLERY by Joel Furtek '90

RESULTS

1V – Four Miles

Yale – 18:51.0

Harvard – 18:58.9

2V – Three Miles

Yale – 13:53.2

Harvard – 13:58.7

3V – Two Miles

Harvard – 9:08.42

Yale – 9:11.32

4V – Two Miles

Yale – 9:23.2

Harvard – 9:27.7

By Izak Epstein '19, Sports Publicity Assistant. You can contact him at izak.epstein@yale.edu.