Tell me about your current role at Yale University?

I am the Operations Manager for Applied Physics and I provide coverage for Geology and Geophysics and Molecular Biophysics and Biochemistry. I have been in this role for the past 9 months, and have been at Yale for 17 years.

What are your main responsibilities?

I oversee the overall operations of the department to support our faculty, students and staff. This includes managing finances and ensuring we are following internal and external policies.

What do you like most about your work?

The people. I enjoy working with the staff in each department and the faculty is great. Each of the departments and disciplines are different and I learn something new every day.

How does your job affect your general lifestyle?

I see the bigger picture of how the university operates. Getting up and going to work is exciting. Your perspective changes when you get to see faculty teaching for the greater good, and striving towards excellence.

How did you begin your career?

I started my career at Yale in Financial Operations at the Medical School and later moved on as a coordinator at the Human Investigation Committee & Cancer Center. Much of what I did focused on the protection and well-being of patients in a research setting. As a coordinator I focused on performance metrics and quality control. In my last role I was a financial analyst for Faculty Research Management Services where I supported faculty with grant management which has been incredibly helpful with what I do in my current position.

What steps would you recommend one take to prepare to enter this field?

It’s important to network. Working with the Working Women’s Network and the Yale Latino Networking Group has helped me learn more about the university and how it operates. Working with people and being in a team environment is rewarding. What you get in return makes your everyday life so much better. I also recommend taking advantage of what Yale offers in terms of enrichment and exposure by attending events organized by the affinity groups.

What skills, abilities, and personal attributes are essential to success in your job/this field?

Networking. We learn so much from each other. You need to be willing to expose yourself to others and not be afraid to ask questions. The people you meet while networking very well might be the same people who will help support you in your job.

If you could do it all over again, would you choose the same path for yourself? If not, what would you change?

I probably would. Each job at Yale helped to provide a foundation of knowledge. While working at the Cancer Center, and even in my current job, I see how much Yale is a part of our community. Whether we are helping to heal people or supporting our faculty who develop quantum theories, we are part of the community here and around the world, educating the new leaders of tomorrow (great young people with a willingness to learn, and experts who are willing to share knowledge).

What does YLNG mean to you and how have you contributed as a member of the Steering Committee?

YLNG helped me feel that I belong to a smaller more intimate group of people at Yale. YLNG provided support, understanding, and a networking framework, which helped me grow. The relationships and friendships that I made are so important, as well as the support received when working with the affinity groups. I was able to explore my interests, assume leadership roles, and work on things that were important to me as a member of the community. I also gained confidence to step out of my comfort zone. I’m a huge fan, and just wish more people took advantage of what the affinity groups have to offer.