President Peter Salovey is one of 14 trailblazing individuals who received honorary degrees from McGill University on June 5.

Salovey received an honorary Doctor of Laws from the Faculty of Education at the Education Convocation ceremony.

“This year’s honorary doctorate recipients include people who have broken important ground here in Quebec and around the world, and have improved lives and well-being for populations around the globe,” said Suzanne Fortier, principal and vice-chancellor of McGill, when she announced this year’s honorands in April. She added, “I think their stories will be a source of inspiration, both for the McGill community at large, and the Class of 2018 as they embark on their own exciting journeys.”

The citation for Salovey read: “For many years, Dr. Salovey has combined excellence in scholarship with a commitment to outstanding university leadership. An innovative and prolific scientist, he has authored or edited many influential books, which have been translated into 11 languages so far. Dr. Salovey has published hundreds of journal articles and essays focusing on human emotions and health behaviors. His work has shaped our understanding of emotions. He was one of the pioneers — or the pioneer, depending what article you have read — in the development of the framework for what we know as ‘emotional intelligence.’ This concept has crossed over from academic circles into the popular arena. His ideas are now heard on daytime media shows, cited in bestsellers, and his work is applied in schools, business, and throughout society — a perfect example of linking academic research, science, and applied knowledge that can be translated to improving the quality of life.”

It continues: “Dr. Salovey is the founder of what’s now the Yale Center for Emotional Intelligence, and besides developing his own research, he has dedicated himself to mentoring and assisting in the career development of young faculty members. As an administrator, he has fostered diversity, equity, and academic integrity in university environments. He has overseen the expansion of Yale’s undergraduate student body and the development of new academic priorities for the coming decades. Dr. Salovey has won two of Yale’s most prestigious teaching awards. In 2013, he was elected to the prestigious American Academy of Arts and Sciences and to the National Academy of Medicine. By illuminating the rich, complex way that our minds integrate the rational and the emotional, Dr. Salovey has helped to show us who we truly are.”