The Yale International Operations and Compliance Committee (IOCC), a group that provides guidance and support to the university on international activities, unveiled a new version of the Yale Travel Registry earlier this year.

The Yale Travel Registry is a web-based tool that allows Yale community members to record their travel plans so that in the event of a major emergency, the university is able to contact them. Instructions for using the new Yale Travel Registry are posted on the International Toolkit: http://world-toolkit.yale.edu/yale-travel-registry-instructions.

“We have great resources we can offer during an emergency event, including evacuation support in certain situations. During an emergency, every minute counts, so if we can quickly determine who is in a location by checking the Travel Registry we are better able to offer that kind of help in a timely way,” said Don Filer, executive director of the Office of International Affairs.

With the increasing amount of travel conducted by Yale students, faculty, and staff, it is important for Yale to be able to be able to reach travelers who are in areas affected by adverse situations, Filer added.

Carol Snow, deputy chief conservator and the Alan J. Dworsky Senior Conservator of Objects at the Yale University Art Gallery, was in one of those areas last summer.

“Last summer I was working on an archaeological excavation in western Turkey and was there for both the bombings at Istanbul airport and the failed coup,” said Snow. “Being contacted by Yale during those tragic events made me feel like someone was really watching out for me and ready to help in any way to be sure we were safe.”

In addition to the Yale Travel Registry, the IOCC provides several other important resources related to international travel.

One such resource is the International Toolkit (http://world-toolkit.yale.edu/). Compiled by the IOCC, the Toolkit is a comprehensive guide to the resources available to university students, faculty, and staff who are participating in international activities. The Toolkit also contains important details about passports, visas, vaccinations, and travel health insurance, among other topics.

Another important tool for travelers is the UHCGlobal travel assistance program. The university provides UHCGlobal coverage at no cost to all current students, employees, and dependent family members traveling with university employees. Not to be confused with health insurance, UHCGlobal offers international and domestic emergency medical, security, and travel assistance services for business and personal travel 100 miles or more away from one’s permanent residence. While traveling, university students, staff, and dependent family members should carry their UHCGlobal ID card with them at all times.

To access and print the UHCGlobal ID card, visit: http://ogc.yale.edu/sites/default/files/d6_files/uhcg_yale_id_card_12-2015_0_0.pdf.