If you need to evacuate, take your animals with you and/or plan ahead to have your livestock moved to safer ground. Please use the Animal Evacuation Kit as a resource.

To determine the locations of established pet shelters and/or pet friendly shelters, listen for announcements on your local radio stations or monitor your town website. The radio may repeat instructions regarding evacuation sites, locations of roadblocks, and a phone number or email address to ask for help. You can also monitor the town website and local TV stations. In some areas, you can sign up for a service that will send a text message to your cell phone during emergencies.

Companion Pets - Plan ahead to bring them with you. It is simply too dangerous to leave companion animals unattended during natural disasters. The best way to ensure the safety of your pets is to evacuate with them.

Best evacuation options are to make plans to re-locate with friends, relatives or pet friendly hotels in safe areas away from the disaster. Also check boarding kennels or humane societies, stables or racetracks, or private farms outside your immediate area can shelter your animals in the event of a disaster. Also, make arrangements with trustworthy neighbors for pet and livestock care if a disaster strikes and you cannot get home in time to evacuate. This person should have access to your animals and be familiar with them.

Sheltering with your Pet

If you must use an evacuation shelter, listen for information regarding co-located animal shelters. You must stay at the human shelter to be allowed to shelter your pet(s) at the co-located animal shelter.

You will not be allowed to keep you companions in the actual human shelter unless they are service animals. The Red Cross does not allow pets in their shelters.

You must have a pet carrier, leash or halter/lead, litter pan, food and water bowls, medications, medical records, identification papers, a supply of food and some bottled water, etc., for each animal. Always keep them together in an easily reached place. Include photos of yourself with each animal to aid in identification later should you get separated.