Departure from Dallas was 5 a.m. on Friday, providing suitable time to travel cross-country and arrive in New Haven for lunch and a subsequent talk. After the event, it was straight back to Texas, with obligations filling the docket for Saturday.

It was a whirlwind trip, but not even George W. Bush ’68 was going to miss his 50th Yale College reunion.

The 43rd President of the Unites States was back on campus Friday afternoon in Woolsey Hall, accompanied by his wife, Laura, and surrounded by classmates. He shared the stage with his longtime friend, Yale fraternity brother, and former fellow owner of the Texas Rangers Roland Betts ’68 as part of the program “A Conversation with a Special Guest: An interview and discussion hosted by Roland W. Betts.” The tantalizing title was meant to keep secret the former president’s identity until the event.

“I’m honored to be in your midst,” Bush told the assembled crowd at the outset, before alluding to their shared celebration. “I’m honored to have come back to Yale. And I can’t think of a better reason to do so.”

It was a special moment. For Bush, it was an opportunity to reunite with old friends — those with whom he attended classes, studied, talked, hung out, and grew up for four years in New Haven, from the fall of 1964 to the spring of 1968. For most in attendance, it was a chance to visit with the former president for the first time since traveling to the White House for their 35th Reunion.

“The best friends I’ve made I met here at Yale, and these are friends that have stayed with me for life,” Bush said. “I’ve learned something that’s fundamentally true, and that’s this: Without friends, it’s hard to have a good, healthy life. So for my friends here today, I thank you for your steadfast friendship. That wouldn’t have happened if I hadn’t come here to Yale.”

The best friends I’ve made I met here at Yale, and these are friends that have stayed with me for life. George W. Bush ’68

“I think it shows how important this is,” Bob Ternes, a friend and fraternity brother, said of Bush’s returning for Reunion. “Fifty is important to all of us.”

In all, more than 700 members of the Class of 1968 came back this year, and the overall attendance for the two reunion weekends topped 4,500, one of the highest figures in recorded history.

“Reunions are about connecting — reconnecting with old friends and with the Yale of today, and meeting new friends with whom you share a deep and common bond,” said Association of Yale Alumni Executive Director Weili Cheng ’77, who attended her 40th reunion just last year and was in the audience for Bush’s talk with Betts. “I always say that you can leave Yale, but Yale never leaves you. And I think you saw that with President Bush’s visit, and with the return of so many for our reunion weekends.”

That spirit of camaraderie and bonhomie was evident Friday afternoon. Bush received a standing ovation upon taking the stage, and the general mood of the event reflected that of both reunion weekends: old friends happy to see one another, still eager to learn more, and always delighted to be back in New Haven.

Throughout the hour-long conversation, Bush and Betts parried back and forth like the lifelong friends they are, with Betts at one point quipping, “We have a relationship that’s 50 years of needling. I’m the pincushion. He’s the needle.”

Their discussion touched on every part of Bush’s journey, from Yale to Harvard Business School to his time as the Texas governor, and of course, as president. They then transitioned to a shared pursuit of Bush and his peers: lifelong learning. In Bush’s case, that has taken the form of painting, which he started only recently but says is now an integral part of his life. In fact, his painting of Harkness Tower adorns the 1968 class book.

“I paint all the time now. It’s one of the great learning experiences of my life,” Bush said. “A lot of my friends say, ‘I wish I had a passion like that.’ And I say, ‘You ought to paint.’ To a person, they say, ‘I cannot paint.’ My answer is, ‘That’s what I said five-and-a-half years ago.’

“So here’s a lesson: You don’t know what you can do until you try. Do not atrophy. Keep pushing what you learned at Yale: Be curious and find new things to do. It’s liberating.”

Bush is one of five U.S. presidents who graduated from Yale. Three of those five attended as undergraduates, with Bush joining his father, George H.W. Bush ’48, and Howard Taft 1878 on that list, while Gerald Ford ’41 J.D. and Bill Clinton ’73 J.D. both earned their law degrees from the university.