Visiting Yale University or New Haven this summer? Don’t miss this wide range of exhibitions taking place at different locations within the Yale University Library. All are free and open to the public during regular library opening hours.

The Early Modern Pharmacy: Drugs, Recipes, and Apothecaries, 1500-1800

What did a pharmacy look like in Europe, between 1500 and 1800? This exhibition, organized by students in the undergraduate seminar “Collecting Nature and Art,” shows that collecting recipes and making medicines were common household activities carried out by women, while apothecaries often became targets of satire. Cushing/ Whitney Medical Library, 333 Cedar St., through July 5.

Black Sound and the Archive

Unusual items from the Irving S. Gilmore Music Library collections, including objects that belonged to J. Rosamond Johnson, the composer of “Lift Every Voice and Sing, are presented together with rare black sound recordings. Music Library, inside Sterling Memorial Library, entrances on 301 York St. and 120 High St., through July 30.

Text and Textile (at the Arts Library)

A companion to the Beinecke Library exhibit (below), this exhibit explores relationships between text and textile using rare materials from the Haas Arts Library special collections. Loria Center for the History of Art, 190 York St., through Aug. 6.

Text and Textile (at the Beinecke)

This exhibit explores the intersections of text and textile in literature and politics using hundreds of unusual and evocative objects and written materials from Yale’s vast library and museum collections. Among the featured objects are medieval manuscripts, Gertrude Stein’s waistcoat, loom cards from French Jacquard mills, a Shakespeare first folio, a Warhol-designed paper dress, an array of children’s books, and poetry by Langston Hughes, Emily Dickinson, Susan Howe, and Walt Whitman. Beinecke Library, 121 Wall St., through Aug. 12.

The Yale University Herbarium: Its People and Specimens

The Center for Science and Social Science Information (CSSSI) media wall exhibit presents an exhibit on people influential in the more than 150-year history of the Yale Herbarium along with images from the collection itself. CSSSI, Kline Biology Tower, 219 Prospect St., through Oct. 1.

Taking up the Slingshot: Posters from the First Palestinian Intifada (1987–1993)

Student-curated exhibition presents political posters and photographs from the Palestinian Liberation Movement Collection (MS 1701) in the Manuscripts and Archives of Yale University Library. Sterling Memorial Library, 120 High St., through Oct. 12.